Updated docs on Secondary Index with JSONB datatype (#18198)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/explore/indexes-constraints/secondary-indexes-with-jsonb-ycql.md

image: /images/section_icons/secure/create-roles.png
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: secondary-indexes-with-jsonb-ycql
    parent: explore-indexes-constraints
    weight: 260
type: docs
---

<ul class="nav nav-tabs-alt nav-tabs-yb">
  <li >
    <a href="../secondary-indexes-with-jsonb-ysql/" class="nav-link">
      <i class="icon-postgres" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      YSQL
    </a>
  </li>
  <li >
    <a href="../secondary-indexes-with-jsonb-ycql/" class="nav-link active">
      <i class="icon-cassandra" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      YCQL
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

Secondary indexes can be created with a JSONB datatype column. The use of indexes can enhance database performance by enabling the database server to find rows faster.  You can create covering indexes as well as partial indexes with JSONB columns.

The following section describes secondary indexes with JSONB column in YCQL using examples.

{{% explore-setup-single %}}

## Create table

Secondary indexes in YCQL can be created only on tables with `transaction = {'enabled':'true'}`. This is due to the use of distributed ACID transactions under the hood to maintain the consistency of secondary indexes in YCQL.

> Any attempt to create secondary index on a table without `transactions = {'enabled':'true'}` will result in an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any attempt to create a secondary index on a table without `transactions = {'enabled':'true'}` results in an error.
```

INSERT INTO users(id, first_name, last_name, email) VALUES(6, 'Leia','Princess','lprincess@yb.com');

```

## Create indexes

### Syntax

You can create indexes with JSON column in YCQL using the `CREATE INDEX` statement that has the following syntax:

```cql
CREATE INDEX index_name ON table_name(column->>'attribute');
```

*column* represents a JSONB datatype column of the table. *'attribute'* refers to an attribute of the JSON document stored in the JSONB column.

Create an index on the *'zip'* attribute of the JSON document stored in the address column of the users table as follows:

```cql
CREATE INDEX idx_users_jsonb ON users(address->>'zip');
```

## List the index and verify the query plan

You can use the `DESCRIBE INDEX` command to check the index as follows:

```cql
DESCRIBE INDEX idx_users_jsonb;
```

For additional information regarding the DESCRIBE INDEX command, see [DESCRIBE INDEX](../../../admin/ycqlsh/#describe).

You can also use the `EXPLAIN` statement to check if a query uses an index and determine the query plan before execution.

```cql
EXPLAIN SELECT * FROM users WHERE address->>'zip' = '327';
```

> For additional information, see [EXPLAIN](../../../api/ycql/explain/) statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information, see the [EXPLAIN](../../../api/ycql/explain/) statement.
```

## Covering index and Partial index with JSONB column

> You can also create a covering index and partial index with a JSONB column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also create covering and partial indexes with a JSONB column.
```

### Covering index

> Covering index includes all columns used in the query in the index definition. This is done by using the `INCLUDE` keyword in the `CREATE INDEX` syntax as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A covering index includes all columns used in the query in the index definition. You do this using the `INCLUDE` keyword in the `CREATE INDEX` syntax as follows:
```

```cql
CREATE INDEX idx_users_jsonb_cov ON users((address->>'zip'))
     INCLUDE (first_name,last_name);
```

### Partial index

> Partial index is created on a subset of data when you want to restrict index to a specific condition. This is done by using `WHERE` clause in the `CREATE INDEX` syntax as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A partial index is created on a subset of data when you want to restrict the index to a specific condition. You do this using the `WHERE` clause in the `CREATE INDEX` syntax as follows:
```

``` cql
CREATE INDEX idx_users_jsonb_part ON users (address->>'zip')
       WHERE email = 'lskywalker@yb.com';
```

> For additional information on CREATE INDEX statement, see [CREATE INDEX](../../../api/ycql/ddl_create_index/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information on the CREATE INDEX statement, see [CREATE INDEX](../../../api/ycql/ddl_create_index/).
```

## Remove indexes

> You can remove index created with JSONB datatype column using the `DROP INDEX` statement in YCQL with the following syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can remove an index created with the JSONB datatype column using the `DROP INDEX` statement in YCQL with the following syntax:
```
